---
title: "Intro to qrack: a framework for fast quantum simulation by Daniel Strano"
day: 12
month: 11
year: 2020
time: 12PM EST/5PM GMT
speaker: "Daniel Strano"
image: jplojpp1dibwvvfjzvgh
---

## About the talk

**[vm6502q/qrack](https://github.com/vm6502q/qrack)** is a quantum computer simulation framework designed for the highest performance on the widest possible range of consumer-grade "classical" hardware platforms. It has 0 required external software dependencies besides C++11 standard, it optionally supports OpenCL accelerators back to the v1.1 standard, including multi-accelerator operation, and it prides itself on its "novel optimization layer." The speaker will outline the many features of the framework, including the theory behind the novel optimization layer, culminating in a simulator stack whose general use case is also its highest performance "Swiss Army knife" simulator, which has been integrated with a much wider developing quantum open source stack via plugins. Quantitative benchmarks will also be discussed, including performance on the quantum Fourier transform and an example of a "quantum volume"-type random universal circuit. Check out the project [Discord](https://discordapp.com/invite/Gj3CHDy) for more info!
    
      
## About the speaker
    
**Daniel Strano** is senior software developer for PDHI (Basking Ridge, NJ). He holds a B.A. in physics and has worked as a data scientist or software engineer for companies including Pacific Northwest National Laboratories (Richland, WA) and S&A Technologies, LLC (Newark, NJ). For the past three years, he is the lead developer of the vm6502q/qrack quantum computing simulation framework, along with Benn Bollay, which has received a Unitary Fund grant. His personal research and literary blog is at ultraphrenia.com, including information and videos about his open source extensions to the OpenRelativity physics module for Unity3D, by the MIT Game Lab, to which he is a community contributor via a personal fork on GitHub.
