---
title: "qutip-qip: Pulse-level circuits simulation by Boxi Li"
day: 7
month: 4
year: 2022
time: 12PM EST/5PM GMT
speaker: "Boxi Li"
image: odj9ny6asjcwfxdxpkt2
---
## About the talk
    
In quantum computing, a quantum circuit is often represented as a sequence of unitary gates. However, when engineering quantum hardware, the physical qubits and their dynamics are usually described by the Hamiltonians. The characterization of noise also varies in those two different representations. Boxi will talk about quantum circuits represented by the control Hamiltonians and introduce the qutip-qip package, which represents and simulates quantum circuits at the pulse level. As a family package under the QuTiP organization, it leverages QuTiP's quantum dynamics solvers to solve the continuous time evolution of the qubits with realistic physical models. The package includes a few predefined physical models and provides the necessary compiling and scheduling functionality. In addition, it allows the user to build custom models of physical qubits and define various types of noise, such as environment-induced decoherence and noise in the control pulses.
    
      
## About the speaker
    
**Boxi Li** is a PhD candidate at Forschungszentrum Jülich (Jülich research centre) in Germany, working on quantum control and modelling for superconducting qubits. I did my Bachelors at the University of Heidelberg and went to ETHZ for a master's degree, during which I also enjoyed a short stay at TU Delft, exploring the magic of quantum networks. I started my contribution to QuTiP from a GSoC project in 2019 and joined the development team thereafter, mainly maintaining the qutip-qip repository.
