---
title: Unitary Fund 2021 Annual Report
date: 1 February 2022
author: Will Zeng and the Unitary Fund Team
---
To the Unitary Fund community,

As we close off 2021, we look forward to the continued growth of our organization, community, and our mission in supporting the quantum ecosystem to benefit more people.

Some highlights from our [2021 Annual Report](https://unitary.fund/assets/Unitary_Fund_2021_Report.pdf) including:

- [**19 new projects**](https://unitary.fund/grants.html) were supported with microgrants, spanning from software to education and new community development across 10 different countries.
- Our [**Corporate Member Program**](https://unitary.fund/posts/2021-corporate-members.html) grew to include IBM and Accenture as our Core Members, and Xanadu, IonQ, BCG, Pasqal, IQM, and DoraHacks as Supporting Members.
- [**Mitiq’s**](https://mitiq.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) new features continue its status as the leading compiler for error mitigation. And the open source community around it grows as well as we connect with users globally through our talks, conferences, and events. The new Mitiq integration with Braket and PennyLane were featured on the AWS and PennyLane blogs.
- We hosted the first edition of [**unitaryHACK**](https://unitaryfund.github.io/unitaryhack/), a decentralized hackathon with bounties on [**19 open source quantum projects**](https://unitaryfund.github.io/unitaryhack/participating-projects.html). There were a total of 35 hackers, 64 contributions in two weeks, with 50% of hackers being new to Open Source, and 100% new to quantum open source.
- The launch of Unitary Fund’s [**Ambassadors Program**](https://unitary.fund/posts/uf_ambassadors.html), recognizes contributors that go above and beyond in their quantum open source contributions.

We are excited to see the growing developments in quantum open-source projects and are eager to continuously support this community.

How can you help? Help spread the word about Unitary Fund and our microgrant program to new communities across the world. We could especially use help reaching out to communities that are typically underrepresented in quantum technology.

We're always happy to receive feedback on our programs or to answer questions. Send an email to [info@unitary.fund](mailto:info@unitary.fund).

Thanks to all of you for your commitment, excitement, and support.

Looking forward to 2022!

-Will and the Unitary Fund Team

<!--
Thanks for contributing a blog post to the UF site!

Some quick tips:
- Use the `title` field to set the title of your post, no first level header needed.
- Standard markdown formatting is supported (code blocks, links, images, etc.)
  - Put images for your post in the `images` folder.
- If you need further custom formatting, direct html will work here as well.
-


NOTE: If this post needs external attribution, include the line below at the very top.
> _This blog was originally posted [here](), and is reproduced with the author's permission._ -->
