---
title: Making quantum error mitigation practical
date: May 17, 2023
author: Will Zeng and Nathan Shammah
---

Useful applications of quantum computers require significant reductions in
logical error rates.[^1][^2][^3][^4][^5][^6] One direction to achieve this is
to implement quantum error correcting codes. Another direction, complementing
quantum error correction, are new techniques for quantum error
mitigation.[^7][^8][^9][^10][^11][^12][^13][^14][^15][^16][^17]
These are algorithmic methods that are designed to be less experimentally
demanding than full quantum error correction. However, this benefit comes at the
cost of being less general and more heuristic.

## Challenges in quantum error mitigation

There are several key challenges in making error mitigation practical.

**Reducing error mitigation overhead**. For example, in some techniques, the
number of samples $N$ required to approximate the expectation value output from
an ideal quantum computer to within an error $\delta$ scales[^18] as
$N \propto \gamma^2/\delta^2$, where $\gamma$ is a constant that becomes larger
as the quantum program becomes larger and the quantum computer becomes noisier.
The $\gamma$ values of approximately 1.02 have been measured in IBM
processors.[^19] This exponential dependence emphasizes how important it is to
improve performance of different error mitigating techniques and to study their
fundamental limits.[^20]

**Calibrating optimal techniques**. While there are a growing number of options
available, this means the programmer must choose what techniques to use and
with what parameters. Making this choice well depends on the hardware target
and on having a good model of the noise. Further, there is a tradeoff between
spending valuable quantum computer time further calibrating the error
migitation vs. exploiting the model that is currently available. Additionally,
while there have been shown benefits to composing error mitigating
techniques---such as[^13] where generalizing PEC and ZNE produces a more robust
method---there are open research questions about how best to do this
composition. These calibration and composition choices need to be made scalable
so that they apply to larger QPUs whose output cannot be simulated and to
problems where we cannot train on a previously known answer. Finally, several
error mitigating techniques require lower level access to control electronics
that is not always available from vendors. More abstract techniques and the
integration of error mitigation at lower levels of the stack are needed to
improve performance.

**Error mitigation and fault-tolerance**. How can error mitigation be applied
to accelerate the deployment of error correcting codes? For example, Pauli
twirling can convert coherent errors into stochastic noise[^21] that could
improve the performance of error correction. Further, error mitigation can be
extended into the fault-tolerant regime where it can reduce overheads[^22] and,
in some examples, improve the number of logical operations that can be applied
by a factor of 1000X.[^23]

## Opportunities for quantum error mitigation

These challenges are opportunities to both improve the performance of today's
quantum computers and also accelerate roadmaps across hardware modalities,
including quantum sensors and networks. If properly seized, then error
mitigation can provide a smooth ramp up towards quantum advantage,[^24] making
it easier for the quantum technology industry to cross the chasm to valuable
applications. We describe three key categories of opportunity:

1. There is an opportunity to use **open source software**, such as the cross
platform error-mitigating compiler Mitiq,[^25] to study and automate the
calibrations needed for optimal error mitigation. Open source error mitigation
implementations are accretive, allowing researchers and programmers to take
advantage of the state of the art without needing to implement everything from
scratch themselves. The community using this software can study and fine tune
these techniques across hardware platforms and upstream their learning.

2. Integrating these error mitigating techniques with hardware design offers an
opportunity for **hardware-software co-design**. Here, error mitigating
techniques can be considered in both NISQ and fault-tolerant quantum computer
architectures. One could, for example, tailor the noise channels towards ones
that are easy for mitigating techniques to calibrate and counter.

3. Research at the **intersection of error mitigation and error correction**. As
error correction becomes more practical, it is likely that there are new error
mitigating techniques that can be discovered that integrate well with error
correction.

## Assessment and Timeline

Progress on error mitigation can be assessed using benchmarks of performance
such as effective quantum volume,[^23] improved performance of application
level benchmarks, or improvements in logical gate fidelity or coherence. It is
important that the assessed performance takes into account the cost
and time of classical post- and pre- computations used in the error mitigation.
Ideally these assessments of mitigation performance will occur in the supremacy
regime where it is non-trivial (or impossible) to classically simulate the
results directly. A final assessment for software tools, such as error
mitigating compilers, is their usage by the community with metrics like
downloads, GitHub stars, citations, etc.

Now is a good time to focus on these error mitigation challenges since (1) we
have a stable pool of techniques that are ready to be reduced to practice and
(2) we have a need from applications and fault-tolerant design to reduce error
rates as quickly as possible. Success on these challenges can meaningfully
affect the timeline to useful quantum computing across the whole field.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[^1]: Alexander M Dalzell, et al. End-to-end resource analysis for quantum 
    interior point methods and portfolio optimization. arXiv preprint 
    [arXiv:2211.12489](https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.12489), 2022.

[^2]: Michael Kühn, et al. Accuracy and resource estimations for quantum 
    chemistry on a near-term quantum computer. J. Chem. Theor. Comp., 15(9):4764–
    4780, 2019.

[^3]: Shouvanik Chakrabarti, et al. A threshold for quantum advantage in 
    derivative pricing. Quantum, 5:463, 2021.

[^4]: Andrew J Daley, et al. Practical quantum advantage in quantum simulation. 
    Nature, 607(7920):667–676, 2022.

[^5]: Michael E Beverland, et al. Assessing requirements to scale to practical 
    quantum advantage. arXiv preprint [arXiv:2211.07629](https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.07629), 2022.

[^6]: Craig Gidney and Martin Ekerå. How to factor 2048 bit rsa integers in 8 
    hours using 20 million noisy qubits. Quantum, 5:433, 2021.

[^7]: Suguru Endo, et al. Hybrid quantum-classical algorithms and quantum error 
    mitigation. J. Phys. Soc. Jap., 90(3):032001, 2021.

[^8]: Zhenyu Cai, et al. Quantum error mitigation. arXiv preprint 
    [arXiv:2210.00921](https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.00921), 2022.

[^9]: Chao Song, et al. Quantum computation with universal error mitigation on 
    a superconducting quantum processor. Science advances, 5(9):eaaw5686, 2019.

[^10]: Christophe Vuillot. Is error detection helpful on IBM 5Q chips? 
    arXiv preprint [arXiv:1705.08957](https://arxiv.org/abs/1705.08957), 2017.

[^11]: Abhinav Kandala, et al. Error mitigation extends the computational reach 
    of a noisy quantum processor. Nature, 567(7749):491–495, 2019.

[^12]: Tudor Giurgica-Tiron, et al. Digital zero noise extrapolation for 
    quantum error mitigation. In Int. Conf. Quant. Comp. Eng., pages 306–316. 
    IEEE, 2020.

[^13]: Andrea Mari, et al. Extending quantum probabilistic error cancellation 
    by noise scaling. Physical Review A, 104(5):052607, 2021.

[^14]: Google AI Quantum et al. Hartree-Fock on a superconducting qubit quantum 
    computer. Science, 369(6507):1084–1089, 2020.

[^15]: Benjamin McDonough, et al. Automated quantum error mitigation based on 
    probabilistic error reduction. arXiv preprint 
    [arXiv:2210.08611](https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.08611), 2022.

[^16]: Shuaining Zhang, et al. Error-mitigated quantum gates exceeding physical 
    fidelities in a trapped-ion system. Nature Commun., 11(1):1–8, 2020.
    
[^17]: Vincent Russo, et al. Testing platform-independent quantum error 
    mitigation on noisy quantum computers. arXiv preprint 
    [arXiv:2210.07194](https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.07194), 2022.

[^18]: Ryuji Takagi. Optimal resource cost for error mitigation. 
    Physical Review Research, 3(3):033178, 2021.

[^19]: IBMResearch. With fault tolerance the ultimate goal, error 
    mitigation is the path that gets quantum computing to usefulness, 2021.

[^20]: Ryuji Takagi, et al. Fundamental limits of quantum error mitigation. 
    npj Quantum Information, 8(1):114, 2022.

[^21]: Akel Hashim, et al. Randomized compiling for scalable quantum 
    computing on a noisy superconducting quantum processor. Phys. Rev. X, 
    11:041039, Nov 2021.

[^22]: Matteo Lostaglio and Alessandro Ciani. Error mitigation and 
    quantum-assisted simulation in the error corrected regime. Phys. Rev. 
    Lett., 127(20):200506, 2021.

[^23]: Yasunari Suzuki, et al. Quantum error mitigation as a universal 
    error reduction technique: Applications from the NISQ to the fault-tolerant 
    quantum computing eras. PRX Quantum, 3(1):010345, 2022.

[^24]: Ryan LaRose, et al. Mitiq: A software package for error mitigation 
    on noisy quantum computers. Quantum, 6:774, 2022.

[^25]: Ryan LaRose, et al. Error mitigation increases the effective 
    quantum volume of quantum computers. arXiv preprint 
    [arXiv:2203.05489](https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.05489), 2022.

